Symfony UX Turbo: content negotiation and Doctrine integration (#64)
symfony/ux: src/Turbo/README.md

# Symfony UX Turbo

Symfony UX Turbo is a Symfony bundle integrating the [Hotwire Turbo](https://turbo.hotwire.dev)
library in Symfony applications. It is part of [the Symfony UX initiative](https://symfony.com/ux).

> Symfony UX Turbo allow having the same user experience as with [Single Page Apps](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single-page_application)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Symfony UX Turbo allows having the same user experience as with [Single Page Apps](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single-page_application)
```

but without having to write a single line of JavaScript!

Symfony UX Turbo also integrates with [Symfony Mercure](https://symfony.com/doc/current/mercure.html) to broadcast DOM changes
to all currently connected users!

You're in a hurry? Take a look to [the chat example](#sending-async-changes-using-mercure-a-chat) to discover the full potential
of Symfony UX Turbo.

## Installation

Symfony UX Turbo requires PHP 8+ and Symfony 4.4+.

Install this bundle using Composer and Symfony Flex:

```sh
composer require symfony/ux-turbo

# Don't forget to install the JavaScript dependencies as well and compile

> yarn install --force

Reviewer 2: why force?

Author: It's like that in all readme fils of this repo.

        // ...
    }
}
```

#### Writing Tests

Under the hood, Symfony UX Turbo relies on JavaScript to update the HTML page.
To test if your website works properly, you will have to write [UI tests](https://martinfowler.com/articles/practical-test-pyramid.html#UiTests).

Fortunately, we've got you covered! [Symfony Panther](https://github.com/symfony/panther) is a convenient testing tool
using real browsers to test your Symfony application. It shares the same API as BrowserKit, the functional testing tool shipped with Symfony.

[Install Symfony Panther](https://github.com/symfony/panther#installing-panther), and write a test for our Turbo Frame:

```php
// tests/TurboFrameTest.php
namespace App\Tests;

use Symfony\Component\Panther\PantherTestCase;

class TurboFrameTest extends PantherTestCase
{
    public function testFrame(): void
    {
        $client = self::createPantherClient();
        $client->request('GET', '/');

        $client->clickLink('This block is scoped, the rest of the page will not change if you click here!');
        $this->assertSelectorTextContains('body', 'This will replace the content of the Turbo Frame!');
    }
}
```

> Run `bin/phpunit` to execute the test! Symfony Panther automatically started your application with a web server
> and tested it using Google Chrome (Firefox is also supported)!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Run `bin/phpunit` to execute the test! Symfony Panther automatically starts your application with a web server
and test it using Google Chrome (Firefox is also supported)!
```

> You can even let Panther open Chrome, and see what happens: `PANTHER_NO_HEADLESS=1 bin/phpunit --debug`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can even watch changes happening in Chrome by using: `PANTHER_NO_HEADLESS=1 bin/phpunit --debug`
```

[Read the Turbo Frames documentation](https://turbo.hotwire.dev/handbook/frames) to learn everything you can do using Turbo Frames.

### Coming Alive with Turbo Streams

Turbo Streams are a way for the server to send partial page updates to clients.

> There are two main way to receive the updates:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two main ways to receive the updates:
```

-   in response to a user action, for instance when the user submits a form

> -   asynchronously, by sending updates to the clients using [Mercure](https://mercure.rocks), [WebSocket](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WebSockets_API) and similar protocols

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   asynchronously, by sending updates to clients using [Mercure](https://mercure.rocks), [WebSocket](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WebSockets_API) and similar protocols
```

                return $this->render('task/success.stream.html.twig', ['task' => $task], new TurboStreamResponse());
            }

            // If the client doesn't support JavaScript, or isn't using Turbo, the form still works as usual.
            // Symfony UX Turbo is all about progressively enhancing your apps!
            return $this->redirectToRoute('task_success');
        }

        return $this->render('task/new.html.twig', [
            'form' => $form->createView(),
        ]);
    }
}
```

```twig
{# success.stream.html.twig #}

{{ turbo_stream_start("replace", "my_div_id") }}
    The element having the id "my_div_id" will be replace by this block, without a full page reload!

    <div>The task "{{ task }}" has been created!</div>
{{ turbo_stream_end() }}
```

Supported actions are `append`, `prepend`, `replace`, `update` and `remove`.
[Read the Turbo Streams documentation for more details](https://turbo.hotwire.dev/handbook/streams).

#### Sending Async Changes using Mercure: a Chat

Symfony UX Turbo also supports the [Mercure](https://mercure.rocks) protocol. With this feature you can broadcast HTML
updates to all currently connected clients.

> To illustrate this, let's build a chat system in **0 lines of JavaScript**!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To illustrate this, let's build a chat system with **0 lines of JavaScript**!
```

> Start by installing [the Mercure support](https://symfony.com/doc/current/mercure.html) on your project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Start by adding [the Symfony's Mercure component](https://symfony.com/doc/current/mercure.html) on your project.
```

Author: Actually, we need the bundle.

The easiest way to have a working development (and production-ready) environment is to use [Symfony Docker](https://github.com/dunglas/symfony-docker/),
which comes with a Mercure hub integrated in the web server.

If you use Symfony Flex, the configuration has been generated for you, be sure to update the `MERCURE_SUBSCRIBE_URL` in

> the `.env` file to point a Mercure Hub (it's not necessary if you are using Symfony Docker).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the `.env` file to point to a Mercure Hub (it's not necessary if you are using Symfony Docker).
```

Otherwise, configure the URL of the Mercure Hub:

```yaml
# config/packages/turbo.yaml
turbo:
    mercure:
        subscribe_url: https://localhost/.well-known/mercure
```

Let's create our chat:

```php
// src/Controller/ChatController.php
namespace App\Controller;

use Symfony\Bundle\FrameworkBundle\Controller\AbstractController;

> use Symfony\Component\Form\Extension\Core\Type\SubmitType;use Symfony\Component\Form\Extension\Core\Type\TextType;use Symfony\Component\HttpFoundation\Request;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use Symfony\Component\Form\Extension\Core\Type\SubmitType;
use Symfony\Component\Form\Extension\Core\Type\TextType;
use Symfony\Component\HttpFoundation\Request;
```

use Symfony\Component\HttpFoundation\Response;
use Symfony\Component\Mercure\PublisherInterface;

class ChatController extends AbstractController
{
    public function chat(Request $request, PublisherInterface $mercure): Response
    {
        $form = $this->createFormBuilder()
            ->add('message', TextType::class, ['attr' => ['autocomplete' => 'off']])
            ->add('send', SubmitType::class)
            ->getForm();

>         $emptyForm = clone $form; // Used display an empty form after a post

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        $emptyForm = clone $form; // Used to display an empty form after a POST request
```

        $form->handleRequest($request);

        if ($form->isSubmitted() && $form->isValid()) {
            $data = $form->getData();

            // 🔥 The magic happens here! 🔥
            // The HTML update is pushed to the client using Mercure
            // The Mercure topic (here "chat") MUST be the ID of the block that will display the received updates
            $mercure(new Update(
                'chat',
                $this->renderView('chat/message.stream.html.twig', ['message' => $data['message']])
            ));

            // Force an empty form to be rendered below
            // It will replace the content of the Turbo Frame after a post
            $form = $emptyForm;
        }

>         return $this->render('chat/index.html.twig',
>             ['form' => $form->createView()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        return $this->render('chat/index.html.twig', [
            'form' => $form->createView(),
```

### Broadcast Template Conventions and Configuration

If your entities aren't in the `App\Entity` namespace, Symfony UX Turbo will look for a template in a directory named after
their Fully Qualified Class Names. For instance, if a class marked with the `Broadcast` attribute is named `\App\Foo\Bar`,
the corresponding template will be `templates/broadcast/App/Foo/Bar.stream.html.twig`.

It's possible to use the `turbo.broadcast.entity_namespace` configuration parameter to change the default entity namespace:

```yaml
# config/packages/turbo.yaml
turbo:
    broadcast:
        entity_namespace: App\Foo
```

Finally, it's also possible to explicitly set the template to use with the `template` parameter of the `Broadcast` attribute:

```php
#[Broadcast(template: 'my-template.stream.html.twig')]
class Book { /* ... */ }
```

### Broadcast Options

The `Broadcast` attribute comes with a set of handy options:

-   `template` (`string`): Twig template to render (see above)
-   `topics` (`string[]`): Mercure topics to use, defaults to an array containing the Fully Qualified Class Name
-   `private` (`bool`): marks Mercure updates as private

> -   `id` (`string`): `id` field of the SSE

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   `id` (`string`): `id` field of the Server-Sent Event
```

> -   `type` (`string`): `type` field of the SSE

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   `type` (`string`): `type` field of the Server-Sent Event
```

> -   `retry` (`int`): `retry` field of the SSE

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   `retry` (`int`): `retry` field of the Server-Sent Event
```

namespace App\Entity;

use Symfony\UX\Turbo\Broadcast;

#[Broadcast(template: 'foo.stream.html.twig', private: true)]
class Book
{
    // ...
}
```

### Using an Expression to Generate The Options

If the [Symfony ExpressionLanguage Component](https://symfony.com/doc/current/components/expression_language.html) is installed,
you can also pass an _expression_ generating the options as parameter of the `Broadcast` attribute:

```php
// src/Entity/Book.php
namespace App\Entity;

use Symfony\UX\Turbo\Broadcast;

#[Broadcast('entity.getOptions()')]
class Book
{
    // ...

    public function getOptions(): array
    {
        return [
            'topics' => [$this->id],
            'private' => $this->private,
        ];
    }
}
```

## Backward Compatibility promise

This bundle aims at following the same Backward Compatibility promise as the Symfony framework:
[https://symfony.com/doc/current/contributing/code/bc.html](https://symfony.com/doc/current/contributing/code/bc.html)

However, it is currently considered
[**experimental**](https://symfony.com/doc/current/contributing/code/experimental.html),
meaning it is not bound to Symfony's BC policy for the moment.

## Credits

> Created by [Kévin Dunglas](https://dunglas.fr). Sponsored by [Les-Tilleuls.coop](https://les-tilleuls.coop).

Reviewer 2: Maybe credit all the names you mentioned in the PR:

> It has been developed and tested over the past few months by @tgalopin, @nicolas-grekas, @chalasr, @weaverryan and me

You can specify the list of transports to use for a specific entity class using the `transports` parameter:

```php
<?php

namespace App\Entity;

use Symfony\UX\Turbo\Broadcast;

#[Broadcast(transports: ['hub1', 'hub2'])]
/** ... */
class Book
{
    // ...
}
```

Finally, generate the HTML attributes registering the Stimulus controller
corresponding to your transport by passing an extra argument to `turbo_stream_listen()`:

```twig
<div id="messages" {{ turbo_stream_listen('App\Entity\Book', 'hub2') }}></div>
```

### Registering a Custom Transport

If you prefer using another protocol than Mercure, you can create your custom transports:

```php
<?php

namespace App\Turbo;

use Symfony\UX\Turbo\Broadcast;
use Symfony\UX\Turbo\Broadcaster\BroadcasterInterface;

class Broadcaster implements BroadcasterInterface
{
    public function broadcast(object $entity, string $action): void
    {
        // This method will be called everytime an object marked with the #[Broadcast] attribute is changed
        $attribute = (new \ReflectionClass($entity))->getAttributes(Broadcast::class)[0] ?? null;
        // ...
    }
}
```

```php
<?php

namespace App\Turbo;

> use Symfony\UX\Turbo\Twig\TurboStreamListenRendererInterface;use Symfony\WebpackEncoreBundle\Twig\StimulusTwigExtension;use Twig\Environment;

Reviewer 3: Return lines issue

class TurboStreamListenRenderer implements TurboStreamListenRendererInterface
{
    public function __construct(
        private StimulusTwigExtension $stimulusTwigExtension,
    ) {}

    /**
     * @param string|object $topic
     */
    public function renderTurboStreamListen(Environment $env, $topic) : string{
        $this->stimulusTwigExtension->renderStimulusController($env, 'your_stimulus_controller', [/* controller values such as topic */]);
    }

    public static function getDefaultIndexName(): string
    {
        // The transport name, used as key in the service locator
        // Alternatively, configure it using the other supported methods: https://symfony.com/doc/current/service_container/service_subscribers_locators.html#indexing-the-collection-of-services
        return 'my-transport';
    }
}
```

> Because these classes implement the `BroadcasterInterface` and `TurboStreamListenRendererInterface` interfaces,

Reviewer 3: I think we should explain to use the `turbo.renderer.stream_listen` and `turbo.broadcaster` tags (and *then* say that if your services are autoconfigured, this is done automatically).

Author: done

the related services will be [autoconfigured](https://symfony.com/doc/current/service_container.html#the-autoconfigure-option).

## Backward Compatibility promise

This bundle aims at following the same Backward Compatibility promise as the Symfony framework:
[https://symfony.com/doc/current/contributing/code/bc.html](https://symfony.com/doc/current/contributing/code/bc.html)

However, it is currently considered
[**experimental**](https://symfony.com/doc/current/contributing/code/experimental.html),
meaning it is not bound to Symfony's BC policy for the moment.

## Credits

> Created by [Kévin Dunglas](https://dunglas.fr). Sponsored by [Les-Tilleuls.coop](https://les-tilleuls.coop).

Reviewer 4: Can you please remove this line? Symfony doesn't put such credits anywhere, it's a community project :)

```php
// src/Controller/ChatController.php
namespace App\Controller;

use Symfony\Bundle\FrameworkBundle\Controller\AbstractController;
use Symfony\Component\Form\Extension\Core\Type\SubmitType;
use Symfony\Component\Form\Extension\Core\Type\TextType;
use Symfony\Component\HttpFoundation\Request;
use Symfony\Component\HttpFoundation\Response;
use Symfony\Component\Mercure\PublisherInterface;

class ChatController extends AbstractController
{
    public function chat(Request $request, PublisherInterface $mercure): Response
    {
        $form = $this->createFormBuilder()
            ->add('message', TextType::class, ['attr' => ['autocomplete' => 'off']])
            ->add('send', SubmitType::class)
            ->getForm();

        $emptyForm = clone $form; // Used to display an empty form after a POST request
        $form->handleRequest($request);

        if ($form->isSubmitted() && $form->isValid()) {
            $data = $form->getData();

            // 🔥 The magic happens here! 🔥
            // The HTML update is pushed to the client using Mercure
            // The Mercure topic (here "chat") MUST be the ID of the block that will display the received updates

>             $mercure(new Update(

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
            $mercure->publish(new Update(
```

-   `id` (`string`): `id` field of the SSE
-   `type` (`string`): `type` field of the SSE
-   `retry` (`int`): `retry` field of the SSE

Example:

```php
// src/Entity/Book.php
namespace App\Entity;

use Symfony\UX\Turbo\Broadcast;

#[Broadcast(template: 'foo.stream.html.twig', private: true)]
class Book
{
    // ...
}
```

### Using an Expression to Generate The Options

If the [Symfony ExpressionLanguage Component](https://symfony.com/doc/current/components/expression_language.html) is installed,
you can also pass an _expression_ generating the options as parameter of the `Broadcast` attribute:

```php
// src/Entity/Book.php
namespace App\Entity;

use Symfony\UX\Turbo\Broadcast;

#[Broadcast('entity.getOptions()')]
class Book
{
    // ...

    public function getOptions(): array
    {
        return [
            'topics' => [$this->id],
            'private' => $this->private,
        ];
    }
}
```

### Using Multiple Transports

Symfony UX Turbo allows sending Turbo Streams updates using multiple transports.
For instance, it's possible to use several Mercure hubs with the following configuration:

```yaml
# config/packages/mercure.yaml

> mercure:
>   hubs:
>     hub1:
>       url: https://hub1.example.net/.well-known/mercure
>       token: snip
>     hub2:
>       url: https://hub2.example.net/.well-known/mercure
>       token: snip

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
mercure:
  hubs:
    hub1:
      url: https://hub1.example.net/.well-known/mercure
      jwt: snip
    hub2:
      url: https://hub2.example.net/.well-known/mercure
      jwt: snip
```
